PIP-0: Meta
===========

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:

Overview
########

DDRP is an experimental protocol for storing and synchronizing small amounts of
data over a global, decentralized gossip network.

Blobs
*****

DDRP stores data in fixed-length files called "blobs." Blobs are addressed by
Handshake names in a 1:1 mapping. To assert ownership over a blob, Handshake
nameholders generate a public/private key pair and insert the public key into
their name's TXT records. They can then authenticate blob updates using their
private key.

In contrast to other decentralized storage protocols, DDRP nodes store all data
on the network locally. This creates what these documents refer to as the
"global view," and allows for rich applications to be built on top of DDRP that
query local state rather than the network.

See `PIP-3`_ for more information on blob structure and blob ownership.

Network Topology
****************

DDRP nodes are arranged in a gossip network similar to Bitcoin. Nodes discover
one another by querying their peers. Bootstrap peers can be read either from a
configuration file or by querying a set of DNS seed domains.

See `PIP-5`_ for more information on DDRP's peer protocol, and `PIP-2`_ for
more information on how nodes connect to each other.

About the PIPs
##############

PIP stands for Protocol Improvement Proposal. Over time, they will form the
canonical DDRP specification. They are currently being extracted from the
`reference implementation`_, and should be considered a work in progress that is
subject to change at any time.

Acknowledgements
################

DDRP was inspired by a protocol originally designed by Joseph Poon.

.. _PIP-2: ./pip-002.rst
.. _PIP-3: ./pip-003.rst
.. _PIP-5: ./pip-005.rst
.. _reference implementation: https://github.com/ddrp-org/ddrp
