PIP-1: Messaging
================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:

Overview
########

This document will outline the protocol DDRP nodes uses to exchange messages on
the wire. Its inspiration is Lightning's BOLT-1. The protocol is transport-
agnostic, though we will describe the canonical TCP transport layer in a later
PIP.

All data fields are unsigned big-endian unless otherwise specified.

Field Encoding
##############

Message fields are encoded and decoded in-order according to their type and the
message's schema. A message's structure must be known beforehand in order to
encode or decode it - hence the addition of the type field in the message
envelope.

The below list outlines how primitives types are encoded:

#. ``bool``: Encoded as 0x00 or 0x01 if the value is true or false,
   respectively.
#. ``uint8``: Encoded as a single byte in the range 0x00-0xff.
#. ``uint16``: Encoded as two big-endian bytes in the range 0x0000-0xffff.
#. ``uint32``: Encoded as four big-endian bytes in the range
   0x00000000-0xffffffff
#. ``uint64``: Encoded as eight big-endian bytes in the range
   0x0000000000000000-0xffffffffffffffff.
#. ``string``: Encoded as a UTF-8 []byte.
#. ``[N]T``: Encoded as the concatenation of the encoding of T.
#. ``[]T``: Encoded as a binary.Uvarint length prefix followed by the
   concatenation of the encoding of T.

There are also a set of DDRP-specific well-known types with special encodings:

#. ``time.Time``: Encoded as a ``uint32`` UNIX timestamp.
#. ``crypto.Signature``: Encoded as ``[65]byte``.
#. ``crypto.Hash``: Encoded as ``[32]byte``.
#. ``net.IP``: Encoded as ``[16]byte``. Note that while the encoding scheme
   supports IPv6, DDRP does not currently support IPv6.

Authors
#######

- `Matthew Slipper`_

.. _Matthew Slipper: https://www.matthewslipper.com
