PIP-7: Subdomain Blobs
======================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:

Overview
########

Since space on DDRP is a scarce resource, blob owners may wish to partition
their blob space into segments and offer those segments to third parties. This
PIP defines a standard format for partitioning blobs into named sub-segments
called "subdomains." Note that these subdomains are distinct from any subdomains
that may exist on the blob's Handshake name - the existence of a subdomain blob
does not imply the existence of any additional DNS records defined on the TLD.

Magic Value
###########

Blobs that contain subdomains MUST start with the magic value SUB
(``0x535542``).

Subdomain Records
#################

The first 32,768 bytes of the blob (inclusive of the Magic Value) MAY contain
up to 255 Subdomain Records. Subdomain Records define the human-readable names
used to address each blob partition, their index, and a public key for
authenticating the messages contained within the partition.

Subdomain Records are formatted as follows:

#. ``version``: ``uint8``
#. ``name``: ``[15]byte``
#. ``index``: ``uint8``
#. ``public_key``: ``[33]byte``

The ``version`` field represents the version of the subdomain record. Currently,
it MUST be set to ``0x01``.

The ``name`` field represents the subdomain itself. Subdomains MUST have at
least one character, and be encoded as valid UTF-8.

The ``index`` field represents the index value that identifies this subdomain
record. Index values are used to link messages (described in `PIP-8`_) with
subdomain records. While not required, the ``index`` value SHOULD match the
index at which the Subdomain Record appears in the blob.

The ``public_key`` field contains a public key used to authenticate message
associated with the Subdomain Record. It MUST be set to a valid ``secp256k1``
compressed public key if authentication is requested or all zeroes.

Zlib Compression Dictionary
###########################

The second 32,768 bytes of the blob is reserved for a zlib compression
dictionary. It is currently unused, and MUST be filled with zeroes.

Subdomain Data
##############

The remainder of the blob MAY contain one or more Social Messages. See `PIP-8`_
for more details.

Authors
#######

- `Matthew Slipper`_

.. _PIP-8: ./pip-008.rst
.. _Matthew Slipper: https://www.matthewslipper.com
