PIP-5: Peer Protocol
====================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:

Overview
########

Once connected to each other, DDRP nodes exchange exchange ``Ping`` messages with one another to prove liveness. To discover other nodes on the network, nodes request new peers from their currently-connected peers.

Peer Pings
##########

In order to verify their liveness, DDRP nodes periodically send each other ``Ping`` messages. ``Ping`` messages are structured as follows:

#. ``type``: ``0x03``
#. Data:

	 #. None.

Nodes SHOULD disconnect from any peers that fail to send a message within 30 seconds of the last-received ``Ping``.

While there is no explicit ping interval requirement, it is RECOMMENDED that implementations use 5 seconds.

Peer Discovery
##############

DDRP nodes periodically exchange peers through a request/response protocol. The protocol works as follows:

#. The node in need of additional peers sends a ``PeerReq`` message to a random subset of its peers.
#. The nodes that receive the ``PeerReq`` message send the requestor their respective peer books via ``PeerRes`` messages.
#. The requestor connects to the peers specified in the received ``PeerRes`` messages via the handshake described in `PIP-2`_.
#. The process is repeated until the target number of peers (8 in the reference implementation) is reached.

The ``PeerReq`` Message
***********************

#. ``type``: ``0x09``
#. Data:

	 #. None.

The ``PeerRes`` Message
***********************

#. ``type``: ``0x0a``
#. Data:

	 #. ``peer_count``: ``uint8``
	 #. ``peers``: ``[]Peer``

``Peer`` objects are structured as follows:

1. ``ip``: ``IP``
2. ``port``: ``uint16``
3. ``peer_id``: ``[32]byte``

The ``peer_count`` field references the number of peers in the following array. It MUST equal the number of peers in the ``peers`` field.

The ``peers`` array contains the list of peers the current node wishes to send the requestor.

The ``Peer``'s ``ip`` field references the public IP of the returned peer.

The ``Peer``'s ``port`` field reference the port that the returned peer is listening on for new peer-to-peer connections.

The ``Peer``'s ``peer_id`` field is the ``BLAKE2B-256`` hash of the returned peer's public key. See `PIP-2`_ for more information on how peer IDs are calculated.

All fields in ``PeerRes`` MUST be set.

Nodes SHOULD NOT send ``PeerRes`` messages for peers that are listening on a non-standard port.

Nodes SHOULD NOT dial peers in ``PeerRes`` message that are listening on a non-standard port.

Bootstrap Peers
###############

To provide an initial set of peers to connect to, the DDRP team maintains a list of bootstrap peers. Using these bootstrap peers is OPTIONAL. Any DDRP node can function as a bootstrap peer.

Authors
#######

- `Matthew Slipper`_

.. _PIP-2: ./pip-2.html
.. _Matthew Slipper: https://www.matthewslipper.com
